Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lop and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Joshua
Glasgow. He's professor in and chair of the philosophy
department at Sonoma State University. I'm leaving a link
to our first interview. In the description of this
one, which was about the solace, the, his book,
The Solace, and today we're talking about his latest
book, The Significance Impulse on the importance of our
cosmic and importance. So, Doctor Glasgow, welcome back to
the show. It's always a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. It's a pleasure to be here.
I'm, I'm looking forward to our conversation.
So, what is it that you call the significance
impulse? What does that mean?
So that's a label that I use to um
capture the instinct that a lot of people have,
not everybody, and I do think that it's probably
culturally um shaped. But the basic idea is the
instinct a lot of people have that it's good
for us to be important, that if in some
way I can be significant, that that's in my
interests, like, it'll make for a better life than
if I'm just ordinary.
Mhm. And uh you mentioned you use the word
ordinary there. What does it mean to be ordinary
and what does it mean to be important?
Yeah, that's a really important piece of the puzzle.
Um, SO I think that we, we actually use
the word important in various ways. So, you know,
sometimes we use it to just refer to something
that matters, like, um, you know, it's important that
we think about the food we put in our
bodies, for example. And that just means it's something,
you know, that's worthy of our consideration. But the
sense that interests me in the book is, um,
to strive to be In uh of particular importance.
Um, SO one of the people that I use
is an American baseball player named Ted Williams, who
famously said, I want to be the greatest hitter
of all time. Um, HE was striving to be
the best, the most important baseball player ever. And
I think a lot of people can relate to
that. And, uh, you know, whether it doesn't have
to be baseball necessarily, maybe you want to be
the best chef, or the best philosophy professor, or
the best, you know, or or US president or
some other powerful position like that. There's a lot
of ways that people might strive to be important.
So in that sense, where you're trying to stand
out from everybody else, the sense of importance that
matters for this book. I, um, trying to be
important in such a way that you have extraordinarily
high value, and where it's very rare, you know,
like going back to Ted Williams, only one person
can be the greatest hitter of all time in,
in a sport. And um he wanted to stand
out in that sense and be exceptional. So the
sense of being important or significant that I'm working
with is where you want to have rare and
high value. And so to be ordinary then, Is
uh or to be unimportant, to be insignificant. Again,
we can mean those, we can use those phrases
with different. So sometimes we mean something's unimportant doesn't
matter at all. But that's not what I mean,
as you, as you, you know, recognize the key
word there is more ordinary, where what we, most
of us still matter, even though we're not the
greatest hitter of all time, or in a really
powerful position, or the, you know, winning a Nobel
Prize or something like that. But we still matter.
So to say that we're ordinary is to say
we still have value, but it's not particularly, particularly
rare, and it's not particularly high value. You know,
we all have like equal moral status, for example,
and there are other ways that we matter, but
they don't make us stand out as particularly important.
So this idea about or the the importance people
give to being important or an important person, why
do we care so much about distinguishing ourselves from
other people? Where do you think that comes from?
You know, that's a great question. I don't honestly,
I don't really have any good answers, I don't
think. I think we could speculate a little bit.
Like, there are probably good evolutionary reasons why we
do it. We're just trying to explain where this
comes from. Again, I think part of it is
cultural. So I think, you know, I'm from the
United States, and we seem to really celebrate it.
In fact, a lot of Americans like to claim
that America is the greatest country in the history
of the planet. Like, that's something that's important to
Americans to stand out in that way, whereas you
don't see that in all the other countries of
the world, of course. And, uh, within this country,
a lot of people want to seem to stand
out from the crowd. Whereas there are other societies
where standing out from the crowd is actually looked
down upon, where you don't want to be, you
know, the nail that stands out from the plank.
You want to be along the same line as
all the other nails in the plank. Um, SO
I do think there's a cultural aspect. That said,
you could imagine that there might be some, uh,
evolutionary reasons why we might have this drive to
stand out from the crowd and be more important.
For example, it might attract more, um, reproductive partners.
So maybe there's something about that that is appealing
for reproductive purposes, and therefore maybe it confers some
sort of Evolutionary advantage. But I just want to
say this is just guessing. I don't really know
where it comes from. I don't have a good
story to tell. And when you read around as
to what psychologists have to say about it, um,
it's hard to find a deep-seated explanation for where
this comes from. But it does seem to be
really common. And so it's coming from somewhere powerful,
obviously.
Fair enough. So, I, I mean, earlier you mentioned
that ordinary people or people who live ordinary lives
can still matter, but particularly in these modern scientific
world, I mean, looking more at the nihilistic end
of the spectrum here for a second. Is there
any way that we can have some sort of
uh of objective intrinsic value as humans?
OK, so this is, um, I'm gonna, I'm gonna
give you a frustrating answer, I think, but I'm
like, here's my answer. So, I, I am not
a nihilist. um I don't, I do believe that
there is objective value. Um, I, I'm not a
skeptic about value. I'm not a subjectivist about all
value, but I don't really have a good argument
for that position. Instead, in this book, the, the
position that I'm keen to argue against is this
view that, again, that somebody like Ted Williams, the
baseball player, um, holds, which is that it's good
for us to be important. And again, many people,
you know, tell this to their children. I think
we communicate this to um to society and, and
how we glorify certain people and pursuits. Um, SO
I think we're really communicating, um, You know, how
to be important, and that that's valuable. And so
my stance is to say, well, I want to
argue against that, but I wanna give that side
of the debate as much of a head start
as I can in order to, you know, make,
make my argument against it all the more powerful.
And for those people who think I think that
we can be important and that that's good for
us. They are already assuming a certain kind of
objective value. They're assuming that there's value in the
world and just arguing, hey, it's really good if
we have even more of it. If I can
be more important than everybody else, or if I
can be the most important thing in the cosmos
or something like that. So, because they're assuming that
there is value, they're already assuming that nihilism is
false, and I'm just gonna grant that to them
for the purposes of argument. So I don't really
have a good argument against nihilism as much as
I think for the purposes of this book, we
should grant it to the opposition, so that then
when we argue, even still, it's not really in
our interest to be important, and we can't be
important. Um, THAT'S a more powerful argument once we've
granted to, to the people who are in favor
of being significant that, um, you know, there is
objective value in the world. I, I just to
add one other thought to that. Although I don't
argue against nihilism, I do think that there's some
Relief from it. Um, IF, if, if we take
nihilism really seriously, you know, a lot of people
react to nihilism with fear or panic, or skepticism.
And in my view, if nihilism is true, if
there is no objective value, there's absolutely no reason
to respond with fear or anxiety or anything like
that, because there's no reason to have any reaction
whatsoever to anything if nihilism is true. There's no
reasons in a world without value. And so, um,
in my view, although we can't say it's a
good thing that, you know, nihilism is true if
it's true, um, it would be kind of a
relief. You wouldn't have to worry about anything ever
again. It would feel nice, even if it's not
good in an objectively valuable sense. Um, SO I'm
not totally scared by nihilism, I think that actually
there's kind of a, a, a nice, it somehow
leaves some other kinds of anxiety and the kinds
maybe we'll talk about later about what I'm called
the the. You know, value in our lives. Um,
BUT In terms of your question of, can, do
I have an argument against nihilism? No, not really.
It's more of a dialectical point that my opponent
is, is assuming that nihilism is false, so I'll
assume that with them so that we can get
down to business of of what we're investigating.
But in terms of philosophy, there's another set of
people who in this case they agree with you
that there's objective intrinsic value to human life, but
they tend to attribute a negative value to it.
And I'm talking here about the pessimists. So what
do you think about them?
Yeah, great. I, again, I'm not a pessimist. I'm,
I'm, I'm, in fact, the book I say is
meant to be a book for optimists. It's meant
to provide a, a positive way of thinking about
the human condition. Um, NOW, what the argument against
pessimism. It depends on what kind of pessimism. So,
somebody like um Arthur Schopenhauer, who famously argued that,
you know, we're always seeking some goal, which means
that either we're frustrated because we haven't reached our
goal, or we're bored because we have reached it,
and now we don't have anything to do with
our lives. Um, THAT kind of skepticism. Um, YOU
know, I'm really actually um sympathetic with the counterargument
from Kieran Setia, that, um, not all, uh, value
in life is goal-oriented, but a lot of it
is what he calls at like, where it's not
aiming at a goal, but it's just, you know,
spending time with loved ones, or, um, you know,
going for a hike or something like that. These
are activities that we do without necessarily trying to
achieve something, but just for the sake of the
activity itself. And I think that's a great response
to Schopenhauer's. Kind of pessimism. But there's other kinds
of pessimism that are more directly related to the
concerns of the book. So, um, Blaise Pascal famously
is one of those panicky people who, so let
me back up a second and say, you know,
as you know, one of the things I'm trying
to argue in the book is that on a
cosmic scale, we are unimportant. So you might matter
a lot to your family or your friends or
your community in some way. And maybe some of
us matter more to broader communities, like maybe my
university or my students, I matter to them. And
then, of course, some people, not me, but some
Some people are really important on a global historical
scale, you know, somebody like Einstein or somebody who
really is going to make an important difference in
the world. But even that, even the most important
people, the argument of the book is, they're not
that important on a cosmic scale. They might be
important to get into our communities, or even to
the whole planet, but not to the cosmos. That's
that kind of significance is missing. So somebody like
Pascal responds to that with a different kind of
pessimism than what Schopenhauer um is concerned with. Pascal
says, when I think about how I don't matter
much to the cosmos, you know, I look up
at the stars and I realize I just don't
matter to the universe. Um, IN any significant way.
Uh, HE says, you know, I'm fearful, I'm frightened.
And so that's the kind of pessimism I do
want to respond to. And that's where that idea
about the tyranny of value comes in. So, um,
if I can just, you know, elaborate for a
minute, the, the basic idea is supposed to be
that, uh, while It does mean that we're small,
and we're weak, and we're powerless on a cosmic
scale, you know, we can't smash planets together. Uh,
WE can't even just run around our planet and
save all the lives on our planet or end
global hunger or anything like that. We really struggle
to make a huge difference. Um, IT does mean
that we're small and weak and and relatively, um,
you know, we're short-lived, um. And so there's all
these limitations we have, and that's what Pascal freaks
out about. But that's where I want to say
it's not worth having any fear about that. To
be small isn't have to have anything to be
afraid of, it's just to be small. And in
addition, I think it's actually really good for us,
that we're not more important. And this is, um,
you know, one of the culminating arguments of the
book, but the basic idea is supposed to be
that, whereas You might really want to be important
to the cosmos. If you did, that would crank
up the stakes on every choice you make. It
would mean that how you spend your weekend is
now all of a sudden really high stakes because
you're the most important thing in the universe. And
that comes with a tremendous amount of pressure. Um,
AND, and, you know, we're, we're filled in a
moment right now. I think, I think it's fair
to call this like an age of anxiety that
we're in right now, where people are feeling pressure
from all sorts of different angles. And, um, being
unimportant really cranks down the pressure that comes with
those anxieties. If we can say we don't matter
that much, then it doesn't really matter that much
if I'm making the right choice about Uh, what
vacation to take next, or what to have for
dinner, which is something that people really spend a
lot of time worrying about sometimes, uh, let alone
life's bigger questions, you know, like, what career should
I choose, or is this the right life partner
for me? Or is this the right time to
have a kid or start a business or something
like that. Those are all really heavy choices. And
again, we do matter to our communities, so these
things do still matter on my view, but they
really have a lot less pressure um on them
if we're not um That important. And so that's
where I call this, this is a kind of
freedom that we should really enjoy, that I call
the freedom from the tyranny of value. This idea
that, you know, good and bad, and pros and
cons, and right and wrong are gonna dominate our
thinking, you know, has a lot of sense to
it. And all of those categories still make sense
on my view. There still is right and wrong
and good and bad. It's just that it doesn't
matter as much if we get it wrong. If
we get the wrong answer to these things, if
we're unimportant. Whereas if you were the most important
thing in the cosmos, it would matter tremendously that
you get the right answers to these questions. And
I find it, I want to tell Pascal, enjoy
your smallness, don't have fear of it. Enjoy the
fact that you can, you know, just enjoy your
weekend and not have to put too much pressure
on yourself that you're spending it exactly the best
way.
So I asked you about the nihilists, the pessimists.
There's uh one particular flavor of existentialist that I
would like to ask you about as well before
we move on to other topics. What do you
think about the absurdists? Do you think that their
philosop? If he can have a positive psychological effect
on people and where, uh, I mean, how do
you look at it from the point of view
of uh where you come from in terms of
how you approach the questions you explore in your
book?
Right, um, yeah, I mean, absurdism is such a
wonderful and interesting view. Um, PART of it, of
course, depends on what we mean by, you know,
the absurdists. The one I guess that I take
the most, um, direction from is Thomas Nagel and
his famous paper, The Absurd, and his, um, his,
uh, book, The View From Nowhere, where he's sort
of his view is that our, our, the human
condition is absurd because on the one hand, we
go around as if things matter, you know, we
wow. We walk around life as if there is
objective value and um we have to make the
right choices and all that sort of thing. But
he also thinks that, uh, sorry, so that's our
sort of subjective stance is that these things matter.
But then when we try to objectively justify it,
we have a really hard time, you know, of
course, as philosophers are fond of noting, of justifying
that position of finding some good justification for this
belief and objective value. And so he thinks we're
absurd because we're, we have these pretensions, this, this
aspiration to live a life that is objectively worthy.
And at the same time, deep down, we know
that that's really not even something that we can
justify to ourselves. And then that's kind of an
absurd position. Um, SO, when I think about Nagle,
um, one of the, you know, really interesting pieces
of his view is that he recommends that we
be ironic about it, that we kind of accept
both halves of that. And I, well, I like
a lot of Nagle's arguments and find them very
compelling and powerful, I struggle with that recommendation on
two levels. One is more of a psychological level,
that when I'm in this position of philosophical skepticism,
I can't really maintain my grip on this belief
that things objectively matter. I start to lose my
grip on that. So holding those two at the
same time is really hard for me. And similarly,
when I'm in my engaged Um, things matter perspective,
where, where I am, you know, going about life
as if everything I'm doing matters and this world
around me matters. I have a really hard time
taking philosophical skepticism seriously. I have to kind of,
um, put it in its own little box and
contextualize my life. In a way that is separate
from that box. So I, I struggle with Nagel's
recommendation to have, uh, to reconcile myself to both
stances simultaneously. I can kind of bounce from left
to right, but I can't be going left and
right at the same time. I'm that struggle with
that. That's the psychological point. In terms of, of
um of a more philosophical piece of it. The
one, the one hesitation or or or reservation I
have about Nagle's argument there is that he's recommending
irony. But of course, we can't recommend anything if
if it's true that there is no you know,
there is no ultimate justification for our recommendations, which
is part of his argument. So he can say,
you know, enjoy being ironic, or he can say,
this is what I'm going to do, is to
be ironic, but to recommend it as a wise
choice, doesn't really make sense in the context where
we're abandoning wise choices. So, I mean, my own
view is to uh remain in that objectively engaged
perspective where I believe that there is objective value
and and and hope that somehow we can vindicate
that. Um, BUT, um, I, I can't recommend irony
or any other stance, or pessimism or defeatism, or
anything else, um, without, you know, believing that there's
some sort of value out there, um, to, to
base that recommendation on. So, to tie it back
to the themes of the book, you know, I'm
not really, again, to go back to your earlier
question, since I'm not tackling nihilism, I'm instead saying,
well, my opponent who believes that the significance impulse
is a good thing, already assumes nihilism, so. Is
false. So I will assume that it's false too,
just to get the conversation going. So I can
kind of sidestep, you know, there's really hard questions
about nihilism and absurdity, um, because I'm, I'm, I'm
jumping ahead in the conversation, so to speak. I'm,
I'm working at a different level. But I do
have that reaction against the absurdism that it's hard
for me, you know, absurdists are kind of saying,
I just celebrate the absurdity of life. And I
have a hard time celebrating it if there's no
reason to celebrate anything, or to despair about it.
Mhm. So I have now a set of questions
related to importance and the kinds of things that
we tend to associate with important people or being
someone important. Uh, EARLIER you mentioned, for example, Einstein
and talking about uh exceptional people, I mean, it
is one thing for us to attribute some sort
of exceptionalism to certain particular individuals, but wouldn't you
agree that even when it comes to humanity. His
biggest achievements that uh that they all are, or
at least most of them are the result of
collective work instead of being breakthroughs made by particular
individuals that then tend to get all the credit
for them. I mean, do, do you agree with
that or
not? I do agree, 100%, I agree. I think,
um, you know, at least in my country, we,
we overemphasize individual contribution and downplay the collective. Um,
YOU know, this is where somebody like, oh, let's
let's say John Rawls, um, with his theory of
justice, you know, one of the beautiful points of,
of that book is that, you know, the people
who achieve the most, uh, wealth or any other
sort of material well-being. Um, ARE doing it in
a social context where it takes everyone's participation to
make that wealth possible. And we often lose sight
of that, at least in the United States, and
think that, um, you know, there's just a context
that was sort of handed down by nature or
something, and individuals come along and discover some scientific
discovery or produce some wonderful economic development or beautiful.
And don't pay attention to the sort of effort
that you're talking about. And really that's on two
levels, right? There's the historical fact that all of
us are standing on the shoulders of the giants
before us, right? That we are building on a
lot of work that's been done before us. But
also, the communities and social structures in which we
live, concurrently right now, are a huge piece of
us being able to do. What we do. So
even the Einsteins of the world, you know, they
need an economy, they need scientific equipment, they need,
um, you know, the artists need paintbrushes, and roads
to drive on, and markets to sell their Their
artwork on. And all of that takes the work
of everybody in the community. And in that sense,
it is really just the individual is sort of
the last piece of the of a very, very
large puzzle. And it's an important piece. I don't
think we should um say that it's exactly the
same as what everybody else is doing. Um, BUT
we should recognize you're absolutely right that we need
to recognize that there's, it's really a communal product
in every single case. It's hard to imagine. Uh,
HARD to think of any actual historical, um, Achievement
of any kind that's worthwhile, that was created by
somebody who wasn't relying on a humongous network of
support in the in the world.
So one thing that we attribute to many people
who we consider important is fame, their fame, the
fact that they are famous people, particularly when it
comes to fame, is that something that people should
strive for? I mean, is fame really something that
matters that much?
Yeah, it's a good question. In my view. So,
I do want to just say that I, I
do think we should discuss fame and importance separately.
Because you can imagine somebody doing something really important,
um, like, like creating artwork, or, uh, maybe they
did a scientific, made some scientific discovery, but their
boss took credit for it, or something like that.
I mean, that's actually happened many times in the
history of science. And with very, you know, like,
um, Um, in, in many, in many cases. And
so, um, I'm more concerned about importance than fame,
but let's talk about fame for a second, because
it is obviously closely related. You know, in my
view, the reasons, some people seem to really want
adoration. They seem to want to be famous just
for the sake of being famous. And I struggle
to relate to that. I mean, I guess there's
a piece of me that gets that you want
everybody that you. To you. But, uh, I don't,
I'm not totally drawn to that. I am, however,
drawn to a lot of the side benefits of
being famous. So, you know, like a lot of
money can, a lot of wealth can come from
being famous. And I think it's perfectly rational to
want that, or other things, you know, it can
give you access to social networks that you wouldn't
have access to. Famous people like to, you know,
eat dinner with other famous people. And, uh, if
you want to interact with Famous people, it helps
to be famous yourself. So I think that there's,
you know, there are important downstream knock-on effects of
fame that are worth remembering. But fame as a
good in itself is really hard for me to
relate to. And fame has a ton of downsides
that I personally, not everybody, but I personally find
um distasteful. Like, I really value my privacy, and
I really value my alone time. I really value.
Being able to walk down the street anonymous. I
can't imagine what it would be like to be
one of these very famous people who have to
give up that entire piece of life, and they
trade that for fame. That's, that's a really hard
calculation for me to understand, especially when you then
add in, you know, it can compromise your mental
health and your safety. Um, YOU know, there there's
really a lot of risks in fame, but I
do see some of the instrumental benefits like wealth
and access and whatnot.
Uh, WHAT about wealth? I mean, is that something
that goes associated with being an important person and
does it matter from the kind of cosmic perspective
we're looking at uh things in your book, for
example, or not?
Um, SO, let's take that last question. No, it
does not matter for cosmic importance. The wealthiest person
on the planet, Elon Musk, it's still not important
on a cosmic scale, um, on my argument. And
the argument why, let me just briefly, um, you
know, try to sum that up real quickly. The
argument why we're not important on a cosmic scale
is that in terms of what we could be,
you know, when we look up at the stars
and think about how tiny we are and how
little of a difference we can make to them,
you know. Universe. What we're doing essentially is we're
we're we're not denying our value entirely. Um, Guy
Kahane has a really powerful and important argument that
if we're the only sentient or conscious creatures in
the universe, then we're really important. We're adding maybe
all of the value to the universe. I mean,
I would disagree with that, but you can see
where he's coming from, that if it's a, if,
if the rest of the universe is just an
empty field out there with some rocks floating around,
um, then we matter a lot. But I want
to push back against stopping there. I wanna say,
well, even though we matter a lot in terms
of what's in the universe, we still are tiny
and weak, and very short-lived in a universe like
ours. And so there's a sense in which you
say, I'm not what I could have been, you
know, I'm not a god or a hero. And
so, going back to your question about wealth, You
know, the most wealthy people, the most famous people.
Somebody like Elon Musk has a lot of um
stature, right now, he's got a lot of power
in my country. Um, HE also has a lot
of power globally, but he has very, very little
power to change anything in the universe. I mean,
even if he succeeds at, you know, having a
very successful space exploration. Company. It still barely scratches
the surface of a tiny, tiny, tiny corner of
the galaxy, which itself is just one tiny piece
of the broader universe. And, um, in that sense,
um, yeah, all the money in the world literally
doesn't make us cosmically significant, even if it makes
you globally significant or significant in your community.
Something that some people worry about is that they
are remembered forever. But is that even possible? Is
it possible for anyone to really ever be remembered
forever?
Um, I, that's a great question. I'm curious to
hear what you think. Let me, let me, let
me give you an answer, then you tell me
what you think. So I don't think so. I'm
skeptical about that. For one thing is, if we
really mean forever, every single person is gonna get
swamped by all the noise there. There's gonna be
a lot of, you know, over the eons, there
will be a lot of people who contribute a
lot, and no one nobody will be remembered literally
forever, um, assuming that somehow there are rememberers to
go on. Forever, um, that there's, you know, sentient
consciousness of some kind. I can't imagine that, um,
people will be remembered, except maybe in some trivial
sense, like, their data is stored somewhere. And so
there's a record of them. But nobody is actually
cognizant of them, uh, on this argument. And the
other piece of it is that I think we
should remember is that We could never have proof
that somebody can be remembered forever because anybody who's
been forgotten, has been forgotten. And so by definition,
we don't know about that. Like there's no way
to say we've remembered everybody who was important in
human history, because we don't know the people that
have been forgotten because they've been forgotten. I don't
know. What do you think? Is that is that
plausible to you?
Yeah, I agree with that. And I also think
that at least according to the best predictions we
have from physics, I don't think that any of
the possible future scenarios for the universe accommodates the
possibility of there being sentient life forever. So I
don't think it's even physically possible for someone to
be remembered forever.
Right, you'd have to have some sort of uh
religious view, right, that has a God out there
who, who lives out a sentience outside of that
that physical world that you're talking about, right?
Mhm. Yes. So, are the lives of important people
better than ordinary lives?
OK, so this is where they're trying to take
a strong stand and that stand is no. Now
I mean something specific by that. I mean, it
doesn't benefit the person who's important to be important.
Um, IT does benefit society. We should be very
grateful that there are Einsteins and, you know, amazing
musicians, and amazing political leaders. Um, ALL of that
is something that society benefits from. But does it
benefit the leader or the politician or the scientist
who makes this amazing contribution? I argue no, and
this is where I'm really pushing back against the
Ted Williams side of the debate. And by the
way, I'm, I'm following. You know, in the book
I, I, I purposely say I'm following the artist
Frida Kahlo, who said everybody wants to be the
grand coa the, you know, the, the, the big
shot, and um she, she does not attracted to
that. Uh, AND so I'm with her on this
one. And, and so, let's talk about why for
a minute. I mean, you might think that being
important, in fact, many people say that many people
who work on meaning in life, do think that
being important contributes to meaning in life. But I
argue that it doesn't. It doesn't contribute more, I
should say, than ordinary pursuits. So a scientist who
makes an amazing discovery, you know, an Einstein or
or Or Newton or somebody like that, is not
um benefiting their own life more than the scientists
who um It's just doing ordinary run of the
mill work that nobody cares that much about. And
it's, it's fine work, but it's not, you know,
world-changing like an Einstein or a Newton would be.
Now, again, a lot of people disagree with this,
but I want to insist that there's not more
meaning in life, and I have a whole, of
course, set of arguments why. But just to go
big picture for a second, in addition to not
adding meaning in life, I also argue that it
doesn't contribute to um our well-being, the other aspects
of our own personal interests that we care about.
It doesn't, so for example, a lot of people
think that there's value in achievement. And so you
might think, well, Einstein achieved more than the ordinary
scientist, and so he um benefited more than the
ordinary scientists in terms of achievement value. But as
people who work on achievement note, that's not actually
accurate. The value that we get from achievement isn't
correlated with the size of the achievement or the
importance of it. So if you just, you know,
run a marathon or you build a cabin, or
you raise a child, all of those achievements can
be as rationally demanding, can be as challenging as,
you know, curing cancer or Figuring out the puzzles
of quantum mechanics. So, in terms of just um
the value we get out of achievement, or flourishing,
or all the other things we seem to want
out of life, um, the argument of the book,
one of the two main arguments of the book
is that we actually don't advance those self-interests, those
personal values by being important, um. More than we
do by doing the same things in an ordinary
way. So you can't advance your values through important
projects, but you can just as well advance them
through ordinary projects as well. So, in my view,
no, it is not good for us to be,
it's not bad for us, but it's also not
good for us to be important. And this is
one of its supposed to be one of the
liberating things of the book. Is that, you know,
we walk around to be important and people really
even hurt others because they're trying to be important.
They create injustice because they're trying to be important.
Uh, AND all of that is pointless if this
argument is right. If the argument's right, we shouldn't
be striving for importance any more than to be
ordinary, except for when there are rewards attached, like
more wealth maybe or more access to other goods.
Um, THEN there's that kind of reason. But just
being important itself isn't all it's cracked up to
be, no.
And what good is there to be found in
an ordinary life?
Well, that's where we get back to the tyranny
of values. So if we assume against the nihilist,
but with our opponents who believes in significance and
being significant, if we assume that there is value.
Um, THEN a whole range of options opens up,
right? Do we want to try to be really
important? Do we want to be small? Um, SO
like Saul Smolansky has these wonderful arguments about how
you, you don't want to be a tiger, you'd
rather be a house cat, because the tiger gets
hunted. The tiger's perceived as a threat. The house
gets pampered and fed and everybody takes care of
it, and that's it. And so, um, there's a
lot of reasons to think that on a, on
a social level, you would rather be, um, ordinary,
as opposed to important. The additional piece that I'm
trying to add to that in this book is
that freedom from the tyranny of value. That we,
we stock ourselves. We hunt ourselves when we're worried
about how good of a choice we're making, when
we worry about whether we have the wrong priorities
or not. And it really can be a relief
to say, well, I might be making a mistake
here, but I'm not that important, so it just
doesn't matter that much. And the more important I
get, it's actually gonna matter more. So somebody who
has a lot of power on it, so they
have global importance. Like, I have a little bit
of importance in my community. I don't have global
importance. Somebody who does had better worry that they're
making the right choices, much more than I need
to, because I'm just, you know, a, a small
All time person, an ordinary person, and the stakes
aren't high. And so I think we all need
to recognize that having those stakes reduced is to
our benefit. It provides us with freedom, and I'm
a huge believer in all the various kinds of
freedom. I want freedom from government tyranny. I want
freedom from algorithms that tech companies are putting upon
us. I want freedom from others coercing me, but
I also want freedom from value dominating my life.
I want some liberation from that. Because it can
be really um exhausting and powerful. And I think
it's wonderful to, to get some distance from that.
Now, in saying that, you can't run away from
it entirely if we assume against the nihilists that
there is value, you still have to worry that
you're making morally right choices, and you still wanna
be, you know, having true beliefs instead of false
beliefs, and you still want to make the right
choice, even about something small, like what to have
for dinner tonight. But it just doesn't matter. But
if you get it wrong when you are an
ordinary person. And that's what I think that even
the most powerful people in our society should remember
is that, you know, they're not cosmically important and
that can reduce the stakes um and the amount
of pressure they walk around with.
So at a certain point in your book, you
claim that there are things that are worthwhile in
themselves. What does that mean for something to be
worthwhile in itself? And could you give us examples
of things like that?
Sure, again, I don't really have a built out
theory about this that's gonna be very exciting, but
I do think, so for example, if we assume
that value is real, I think that human beings
have a moral status in themselves. I think, you
know, I'm a, I'm a conscient about this sort
of thing, but even if you're a utilitarian, and
you think that, um, you know, each person counts
towards the hedonic calculus of some of the utilitarian
calculus of some kind, um. You know, that's acknowledging
that we matter in and of ourselves. Um, I
guess some people would argue against that with utilitarianism
and say, well, that just makes the individual person
serving that greater happiness total, um, whereas a robust
you would say more that, um, it's truly in
ourselves that we have value and, and maybe that's
part of why. I'm a contian. But, um, I
think that a wide range of ethical views will
acknowledge that we have the, um, some standing, and
we deserve some sort of consideration just by virtue
of who we are. Um, I also think that
there's a wide range of value out there. So
I think there's aesthetic value. I think that, you
know, there's I, I, I live in the American
West where one of my favorite ways to spend
my free time is to go out in nature
and, you know, stare at the Pacific Ocean or
hike up in the, in the beautiful mountains that
we have in the West. And um that has
aesthetic value to me. And so does the music
that I listen to, and so on. And, um,
pursuing that, I think can be worthwhile in itself.
And I think this is important back to the
meaning of life question, because I think, you know,
I'm one of, I'm, I'm one of these people
who's a hybridist about meaning in life in the
sense that I think to get meaning out of
some project, like going for a hike in the
mountains or working on your Your job or whatever
it is, your relationships, um, that we need to
have both subjective attraction to that, and, um, you
know, Susan Wolff memorably says it's where subjective attraction
meets objective attractiveness, that there's something objectively worthwhile about
the pursuit we're doing, whether that's hiking or spending
time with a loved one, or working on some
project. So, in all these cases, I think that
there is objective value, and it's, you know, it's
our opportunity that we get to latch on to
that whenever we can. That's the optimist in me.
Um, SO those are the kinds of things I
have in mind, um, when I, when I talk
about, you know, something being valuable in itself.
And does our cosmic insignificance impact life's most important
values in any way?
Uh, NOT, I don't know, not when it comes
to, uh, uh, again, prudential value, to what's in
your own interest. It does not affect your well-being,
it does not affect your meaning in life, and
that's one of, you know, the maybe the most
important piece of the argument to me in the
book, is that I want to, you know, I
want, I want to make the case that we
can all get maximally served with our personal value.
Whether we're, you know, ordinary or important, and remember
we're all cosmically unimportant, but that doesn't degrade our
meaning in life at all, or our well-being at
all, I argue. Now, of course, again, many people
disagree. Many people think that there's importance, uh, that
importance contributes to meaning in life. Other people think
importance has its own final. THAT it's just another
thing that's good for us. In addition to well-being
and meaning, we should want importance for its own
sake. Um, I think that's wrong. I also think
it doesn't really engage the debate I'm interested in,
which is, what do you say when you meet
Frida Kahlo and she's arguing with Ted Williams about,
you know, should we care about being important or
not? I, I think once we engage that debate,
we have to provide some reason for being important.
And so we can't just say it's, it has
final value, it's, it's, it's like pleasure or knowledge
or something, and that we can't really explain why
it has value because it's final value. So, um,
yeah, I, I think that all the value we
should care about can be had in the totally
ordinary, unimportant life.
You mentioned meaning there. What is meaning when we're
talking about life? What makes life meaningful?
Right, so this is where I side with Susan
Wolf and a bunch of other people and think
that it's uh life is meaningful when we have
a sufficient amount of subjective draw to things that
are actually objectively valuable. You know, a number of
people only care about the subjective piece. They think
if you're engaged and fulfilled. Emotionally or some other
way by your projects and your relationships, then that's
enough for meaning in life. But I and a
lot of other people think that that doesn't account
for all the mistakes people can make, including myself,
by the way, about what's important and what's not.
When you look back on your life and you
think, oh, I was wasting my time with that,
um, or, or I overvalued that project, or some
or I spent too much time on my career,
not enough on my relationships, or something like that.
Um, THAT'S conceding that it's not just about subjects.
FULFILLMENT. It's also about um having uh tapping your
subjective attractions into the right objective values. Now, I
also think the objective values is not enough by
itself, because um I think that, you know, John
Stuart Mill is is a much discussed example of
somebody who went through a meaning of a crisis
and meaning, because he had all these ends that
he thought were really important, and he was really
trying to do these. Important works like lifting people
out of poverty and whatnot. And, um, at one
point, he'd lost his, he, he didn't care about
it, but he still thought it was an important
project, objectively speaking, but he said the end ceased
to charm. It no longer motivated him, and no
longer excited his emotions or his cares. And that
was a real crisis for him. And I think
that that, I mean, I and a number of
other people think that the best way to To
characterize what Mil was going through was he he
was lacking meaning in his life, not just a
feeling of meaning, but he was missing meaning. So
I think we really need to connect subjective attractiveness
to objective value, and that that's when we will
get meaning in life. Now, one thing that I
add to that, so that's the hybrid view of
meaning in life, objective and subjective put together. Um,
ONE question that that view faces is how to
balance the two. So Cheshire Calhoun has this argument
against the hybrid view that, you know, how do
you, how do you rank the subjective and the
objective. And I have um a very specific answer
to that question. In my view, there's a minimal
threshold of objective value. You that something has to
reach to contribute to meaning in life, whether that's
a relationship or a work project or an AT
like activity of some kind, um, whatever it is,
uh, it has to meet this minimal threshold of
objective value. But then how much meaning it contributes
to your life, once it's at that level, doesn't
go up or down with more or less objective
value. Instead, it goes up or down with how
much subjective attraction you have to it. So if
I have a pretty ordinary low stakes, um, project,
you know, I'm, I'm a, I'm a cook at
a local restaurant and I enjoy making food for
people. And I really enjoy it. That can actually
provide my life with more meaning than Mil got
from doing much more consequential work, but that he
wasn't subjectively attracted to at all for that period
of. His life. That was lacking meaning for him
because of the subjective value missing. And so really
subjective attraction, even though I'm, I'm a hybridist who
values both the objective and the subjective, the subjective,
in my view, does a lot of the work
in determining how much meaning we get out of
the objectively valuable, um, um, projects that we, um,
immerse ourselves in.
If our lives are an important, can't that be
psychological, psychologically liberating, for example, if that's the case,
we do not really have to worry much about
what we are able to achieve in life. Right.
Yeah, and that's exactly freedom from the tyranny of
value. That's one aspect of it. And yes, I
think that's a tremendous value that you, nobody out
there should worry that, you know, I'm just an
ordinary. Most of us are working ordinary pursuits, right?
We, and not just in our work, but in
our hobbies and our relationships. We're not out there
doing extraordinarily important things. We're doing important things in
our communities, maybe you're teaching. Um, YOU know, young
people, or you're a nurse, or you are fixing
people's cars, or, you know, building homes or whatever
it is, and that's contributing something. But to, to,
to be upset by that as not making a
humongous difference in the world is uh a a
mistaken reaction, I, I believe. I believe that we
should look at those ordinary pursuits as as beneficial
for us as the more important pursuits. And of
course, remember always that even the most important pursuits
on this planet aren't really cosmically important, and they
can't be because of the size of the cosmos.
And so, and and the and the smallness of
us. And so, We're really not ever going to
achieve the kind of importance that we would want
to, if we thought that being important was crucial
to our, our, our well-being or our personal interests.
So that's out of reach for starters, that goal,
and, and more importantly, It's really not in our
interest. It advances nothing for us individually to be
important. Again, I do think society should reward important
endeavors. It's good that we're getting cures for diseases.
And beautiful works of art and justice movements, like
all of that is improving the world. And so
society should reward those people with maybe wealth or
some other kind of rewards so that we incentivize
that. Although I think it's really tricky. There are
um other books out there that talk about the
pitfalls of those kinds of rewards, so we have
to be careful. Um, AT the same time, just
in terms of, of our personal interests, the only
reward that comes with being important are the socially
attached benefits. Importance itself is not going to benefit
us, and so yes, it's, it is beneficial to
us to walk around and remember that. It just
doesn't matter that much what we choose to do.
And also an ordinary life allows for us to
relieve ourselves of the anxiety and worry and and
worry of becoming someone important.
Correct. That's right. That's right. That's a huge amount
of pressure to take off your shoulders. Absolutely. I,
yeah, absolutely, great point that we, that, that also,
you know, I mean, I think a lot of
people, at least a lot of people in high
Uh, achieving high ambition, uh, social networks really do
worry about that and are constantly comparing themselves to
their peers and rivals, and, uh, trying to achieve
some ideal that's probably unachievable. And if it turns
out that it wouldn't even benefit you to achieve
it if you could get it, that can be
a tremendous relief to not have to worry about
that anymore, for sure.
So one last question then, do you think that
there could be a risk here of promoting mediocrity
instead of just an ordinary life?
I do think that's a risk, and that's why
I think society should remember to um reward uh
people who achieve great things beyond mediocrity. Because again,
we as a society, we all benefit from extraordinary
value contributions, and we should try to uh promote
those as much as possible. But in terms of
celebrating mediocrity, I think we should be really careful
about that because in my view, you still should
try to find meaning in life. And you still
should try to achieve all you can achieve, and
you still should try to flourish as much as
you can flourish. And so, for the in if
by mediocrity we mean you're only gonna contribute half
of what you can. No, that is not my
view. I don't think that my view would would
license that. My view just says that if the
most you can achieve is ordinary, and maybe you'd
say mediocre on some other standard, um, that that's
not bad for you. Uh, IF that's your, that's
the ceiling on your capacity, whether that capacity is
innate to us, or it's because of luck or
social circumstances, or what whatever the the origin story
of the limits on our capacities, uh. Yeah, it's,
it's not celebrating mediocrity in the sense that it's
giving us license to, you know, sit around and
watch cartoons for the rest of our lives. It's,
it's still telling us, you know, go out and
achieve what you can. It's just remember that it
doesn't matter what your achievements end up being in
terms of your personal value, as long as you
are achieving something, as long as you're securing some
achievement that's within your grasp.
Great. So, the book is again the significance impulse
on the importance of our cosmic and importance. I'm
leaving a link to it in the description of
the interview. And Doctor Glasgow, just before we go,
where can people find your work on the internet?
Well, it's, you know, the books are available at
all reputable bookstores, um, so find the books there,
um, and also just by googling my name, Joshua
Glasgow, it'll take you to my web page which
has links to my books and other articles that
I've written.
Great. So I'm also leaving a link to that
in the description of the interview and thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show. It's always a pleasure to talk
with you.
Thank you very much. This is a great conversation
and I really appreciate it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Lays and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Acosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin.
And yoursnacht, a special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.